day one
a small but powerful tremor is shaking
the city of naples italy
the news networks are reporting on the
event the experts believe that mount
vesuvius the stratovolcano on the gulf
of naples will explode soon
but when it's erupted many times in the
past
in fact that's how it got its shape it's
made of multiple layers of hardened lava
pumice and ash
vesuvius last erupted in 1944 but a
major blast happened there
nearly 2 000 years ago it buried the
roman towns of pompeii
and herculaneum and decimated the
surrounding areas
today 3 million people live less than 20
miles from the volcano
and six hundred thousand live in the
danger zone large eruptions happen every
few thousand years
usually after long periods of calm and
the trouble is
vesuvius is long overdue for its next
one
this time though the volcano is being
watched by the vesuvius observatory
it has seismic stations special gps
arrays
and satellite-based radar to help it
measure ground movement
they also have special equipment to test
the chemicals found in the gases coming
from the volcano
all of this helps the experts work out
whether it's about to go off
but will it right now the magma is more
than six
miles from the surface things seemed
safe yesterday
but now they're about to take a turn for
the worse
day three another tremor comes in
measuring three on the richter scale
all the equipment that's installed near
the volcano is now going off
the magma is pushing upwards it's not at
the surface yet
but vesuvius is definitely restless
two more tremors follow in the afternoon
they don't feel like regular earthquakes
and geologists can see the difference in
their seismographs
volcanic quakes register about four to
five less on the richter scale
now the experts are sure it's just a
matter of days or weeks until the
volcano erupts
some volcanoes can be restless for
months or even years before they go
off but that's not how it goes with
vesuvius
day four the ground starts to crack open
as if a giant creature is trapped in the
earth's crust
and is trying to desperately get out for
some air steam escapes from the little
cracks in the soil
certain areas are hotter than others if
you went there
it would feel like you walked straight
into an oven and it would be hard to
breathe
some sheep got too close to the mountain
and passed out
when the farmer found them he almost
collapsed too not from the heat
but from the gases carbon dioxide and
hydrogen sulfide are being released into
the air
the entire area around the volcano
smells like rotten eggs
and many of the forest animals are now
staying clear
the nearby trees have been absorbing
these gases from the soil for days on
end now and they're starting to turn
brown the carbon dioxide levels in the
area are skyrocketing
and all the detectors are beeping
constantly
day six the tremors are getting more
frequent
experts at the vesuvius observatory
monitoring the volcano
say the quakes are coming from the magma
that's being pushed upwards a few hours
later the national emergency alert goes
out
thousands of local people have around 15
days before the volcano erupts
and they need to evacuate their homes
the 600 000 people in the danger zone
start to pack their suitcases and leave
in cars and trucks
there's chaos everywhere but in all that
disorder
some people are standing still they look
around
trying to understand what's really going
on a few of them are taking photos of
their homes
others are streaming all the confusion
on social media
but the senior citizens are just
standing outside
looking at their houses one last time
they hope this is all just a false alarm
it's happened before but who really
knows
[Music]
day seven it was a sleepless night
plenty of the locals have already left
some good people from other towns drive
to the area to help the residents
evacuate faster there's a massive
traffic jam but everyone expected it
this is why the evacuation started early
ferries trains and buses have cancelled
their services to help the evacuees
they're all working on a tight schedule
to make sure everyone gets out safe
without any delays some people refuse to
leave
but their neighbors eventually convince
them to go it will take seven days to
evacuate everyone
and these people will spread out to
other areas of the country
not just to the nearby safe regions
day 10 more than half of the residents
have now
left the red zone after the chaos
there's now
silence and it's interrupted by the
eerie sounds of the tremors
animals are being evacuated too many
people are now trying to save as many
animals from the forest as they can find
day 16 all 25 of the towns that were at
risk
have now been evacuated the red zone is
empty
but the tremors are getting stronger as
the volcano is a pressure cooker
ready to explode white smoke rises from
the large
opening on the mountain top and the
vents on the side
the molten rock moves toward the surface
and the pressurized gases form
bubbles just like the ones you see when
you boil food
suddenly there are some loud booms and
then an
explosion it's loud enough to be heard
thousands of miles away
and the shock wave is felt throughout
italy volcanic rock is thrown up into
the air
a thick black mushroom cloud forms and
expands into the sky
the birds abandon their nests and fly
away in huge flaws
the red hot lava is now spewing out of
the volcano like a fountain
as it flows downward it obliterates
everything in its path
then there's a volcanic landslide part
of the cone-shaped mountain falls off
and millions of tons of soil and rock
break loose from the volcano side
and tumble down the lava spreads on the
slopes
and it slowly slides down into the
forest and the farmlands
the plume of ash hummus and other kinds
of rock has risen so high into the sky
that people can see it from rome then
the tower of debris
starts falling back to earth first comes
the ash
then chunks of rock the ash in the
atmosphere is so dense that it's hard to
breathe
the lava slowly spreads across the area
and pulls down
all the trees all the nearby towns are
shrouded in darkness and smoke
buildings collapse and all around
there's a mixture of heated poisonous
gas and rock moving faster than a car
other rocks and more volcanic ash fall
miles away from the volcano
hitting cars and destroying roofs the
sky is completely
black as the lava keeps on coming slowly
all the nearby towns are submerged
beneath the molten rock
some of the lava even reaches the sea
gigantic white steam covers the shore
where it falls in
and the magma turns black now a weird
neon blue
fire appears on the slopes of vesuvius
this is caused by burning sulfuric gases
they're escaping at high pressure from
the cracks in the volcano surface
when they come into contact with the air
they ignite
these blue flames can reach 16 feet into
the air
now all nearby flights are canceled and
many planes have to change course to
reach their destination
ever since the national alert no planes
have been allowed to fly over the
volcano
the clouds of volcanic ash can damage
jet engines and other plane components
the water supply is now contaminated by
streams of volcanic ash
and it smells unbelievably bad in just
a short amount of time all that magma
has made entire towns
vanish only the roofs of taller
buildings can be seen
after the big and explosive eruption
there are some smaller and quieter ones
at this stage nobody knows if the
volcano has stopped erupting yet
and absolutely no one can go anywhere
near the area
ten years later most parts of the red
zone are now hidden
under hardened but still warm lava
including the ancient site of pompeii
some people have started to forget about
what happened others have begun their
new lives
elsewhere and some don't even want to
think about what happened to their old
homes
but several of them are counting the
days until
they can go back 100 years later
you're walking in what appears to be a
wasteland of volcanic ash
you suddenly realize that you're
standing on top of your
great-grandparents town
everything is now submerged under a
thick carpet of solidified lava
but below it all just about everything
is still intact
completely frozen in time